[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Wisenthal.
>> Joe, you know what's weird?
>> Tell me. Tell me what's weird. There's a
lot that's weird actually, but we seem
to be living in this extremely high-tech
world where you can get a chatbot to
write you an essay or create a video.
>> Do that, by the way.
>> Oh, sure.
>> Mhm. You could buy a robot dog to play
with, all that stuff.
>> And yet, we still seem to be struggling
somewhat to provide cheap and affordable
and abundant energy to power all these
things. And in fact, because all this
new technology guzzles so much energy,
data centers use so much power, it feels
like energy is becoming even more
strategically important in many ways.
>> It definitely feels like we're in an age
of sort of people remembering the deep
constraints that energy imposes whether
it's data center, all kinds of things.
Energy is not a solved problem by any
stretch. Although I would say that in my
limited sort of reading of the history
of energy, it's never a solved problem.
I know at the moment we find we we're in
a period of energy surplus, we quickly
find something to do with that energy.
And once again, we are in a period of
constraint, but it does feel like we're
in some sort of period of constraint
right now.
>> When Kanes was doing his whole abundance
theory, did he mention energy at all?
What did he say? Well, I'm just going to
assume that Kane's promised us all
abundant energy as well as everything
else. and it's not here. So, we're all
upset. Okay. So, um even though we've
had all these breakthroughs in
alternative energy technologies, you
know, things like solar and wind, we're
still using more coal, more oil than
ever. And in fact, there's sort of some
old school energy behaviors going on
with China, stockpiling massive amounts
of oil.
>> Yeah, as you said, coal is booming,
China stockpiling oil, electricity
prices in the US on the rise. Maybe
perhaps due to some of this AI data
center demand. It feels like I would say
precoid at least I don't know if people
got a little bit naive or optimistic or
goldilocks but there was this view it's
only a matter of time before energy is
solved because we're going to have all
this wind and solar. It's going to be
cheap. It's going to be clean. We see
all these cost curves coming down with
like batteries and wind and so forth.
It's only a matter of time before we
don't need the dirty stuff. And right
now it doesn't feel like we're anywhere
close to that. And I'm sort of curious
what happened.
>> Yeah. Well, everyone talked about the
energy transition, but so far it's not
really a transition. It's like a
compliment to existing sources. Anyway,
we could keep talking, but why not go to
our guest who is truly
>> truly the perfect guest. We're going to
be speaking with someone I wanted to
speak with on the podcast for a very
long time, Dan Jurgen. He is, of course,
the author of the Pulitzer Prizewinning
The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil,
Money, and Power. He's also vice
chairman of S&P Global and he also has a
new book out called The New Map Energy
Climate and the Clash of Nations. So, a
lot to talk about. Dan, thank you so
much for coming on Odd Thoughts.
>> It's great to be on with you all.
>> So, does it feel like energy insecurity
is still with us in many forms?
>> Yes, it goes through cycles. You know,
you mentioned uh CO I think during CO
demand went down, prices went down and
people kind of forgot about energy and
and there was a sense in 2021 the
International Energy Agency did this uh
scenario about getting to basically a
renewable world by 2050. But now we're
in 2025 going into 26 energy demand is
going up wind and solar but also coal,
oil and natural gas. And the share of
hydrocarbons in energy has gone from
about 81% to about 80.5% roughly.
>> So it's going to take a while to get
down to zero.
>> Take a while. You know the whole you
mentioned energy transition. I think
it's time to do some rethinking about
the energy transition.
>> Well, good. That's what I was going to
ask you about. So when people talk about
the energy transition, this fantasy or
you know maybe fantasy is a little bit
scenario scenario
>> of okay, we're going to get to net zero
etc. Is this just a matter of the
timeline has been pushed back or is
there a fundamental flaw with the
premise?
>> Well, I think certainly the timeline has
been pushed back. The notion by 2050,
the closer we get to 2050, the farther
away it seems the goal of net zero by
2050 is error. And what Tracy said
before, energy transition has been
energy addition.
>> And what happened? What happened is I
think the reality came back in that we
live in a world that rests on an energy
foundation and that you just can't
overnight take a $15 trillion world
economy and change it from one thing to
another.
>> Are there any scenarios you could see
where I guess new technologies like AI,
the data centers that are getting built
encourage new players to come in and
provide capital for energy? So, you
know, Google building their own gas.
>> Exactly. What we have now is the tech
world meeting the energy world. And
these two worlds have very different
cultures. Tech world things go happen
pretty fast. Energy, you know, in your
software engineer come out with new
software. In the energy world, an
engineer takes seven years to build
something. And these cultures have come
together. And I think one of the reasons
that we're seeing kind of this call the
easy or simple notions and transition
pushed out is what you've mentioned.
It's going to take a lot more
electricity and some of that will come
from wind and solar. But what's come
back into the picture is natural gas is
a electric generation. If you wanted to
go out and buy a gas turbine today,
>> Yeah.
>> you could get it delivered in 2030. If
we back go back to 2022, I was talking
to one of the big companies in the field
and the guy said that year all over the
world exactly one gas turbine was sold
and it wasn't one of ours. So he said
our market share that year was zero. Now
they're all sold out. Is there an
increase in capacity? We we talked about
this recently and this has come up the
shortage of gas turbines. Is the
scarcity being addressed or is there
still this phenomenon where no one
really wants to do the initial upfront
investment in a say factory that makes
the gas turbines because there's still
uncertainty about say 2032 or 2033. Um
what I you know when I talk to the
companies those who were around in about
two two and a half decades ago remember
there was a huge rush turbans and then
it all collapsed and they're worried
about
>> and that was coincidentally or
incidentally that boom was also at a
time of massive tech investment the late
90s which was another period of the sort
of marriage of tech and energy at the
time.
>> Absolutely. That's right. And so I think
they are expanding capacity but they're
not doing it helter skelter. Also like
so many other companies there's a
shortage of the talent that you need. I
mean these are not simple things to
build.
>> One of the reasons we wanted to talk to
you is because you do such a fantastic
job of connecting the oil space with
capital markets and I have always
maintained that oil is very much a
capital markets story. Can you talk
about the difference between how capital
is sourced for something like oil or gas
versus clean energy and whether
attitudes towards the two have changed
at all?
>> Well, I mean it was quite different with
clean energy and a lot of it you know
had tax credits and ability to you know
to sell tax credits and things like that
and a lot of the oil and gas development
may be funded by financial institutions
but a lot of it is funded by the
companies themselves.
>> Yeah. What is it? Like we see these
lines on charts that show the collapsing
price of solar production or the
collapsing price of wind production or
the improvements in battery technology.
>> All true.
>> All true. And yet there is still so much
public money that goes into these areas
and there's so many tax credits and
subsidies etc to kind of accelerate them
along. Why is it that you have these
lines going down and yet they don't
undercut traditional sources in the way
that maybe the tech mindset would
expect?
>> So, well, first remember the renewables,
wind and solar really were not competing
with oil until you started to have uh
electric cars coming onto the scene,
>> but you know, it was interesting. I was
talking to a company that's developing a
big battery project in Europe. I
probably shouldn't say which country,
and they're very excited about it. It's
really big. They said, "Oh, by the way,
they couldn't do it on their own. They
had to go to the government and get
incentive, subsidies, whatever, or a
partnership with it." So, the costs are
still up there. And I think we're seeing
a testing now for wind and solar.
Everybody's rushing right now to get
steel into the ground so they can get
the tax credits, which will expire in
not very long time. So, the testing will
be how competitive will they be? And I
think we'll still see wind and solar,
particularly solar, being put in, but it
won't be enough. And what they concern
right now is about the reliability of
the electric power system. And you see
prognostications about this area that
stretches from Illinois, you know, as
far as New Jersey, that by the end of
this decade, which is not so far away
now, will be looking at very tight
markets with really great pressure on
it. And I'll tell you, the kind of
regulators, the people looking at it are
starting to get pretty alarmed. And
that's why you see a lot of a lot of
discussion and and focus on can we get
permitting reform so you can actually
get something built.
>> Can you just what is the source of
alarm? Is it about the generation of
electrons or is it about the
transmission and with the grid capacity
to balance and take in all these things?
>> Well, it's both and certainly the
transmission is a very key part of it.
But what we have been doing has been
retiring coal plants. We thought, you
know, we weren't going to have any more
gas and electric generation, but that's
coming back. And now you see a kind of
slowdown in closing these coal plants.
And also, we see an election coming up
in New Jersey where electricity prices
are an issue. And suddenly, this whole
issue, uh, I was looking at our numbers
and electricity prices have been going
up at twice the rate of inflation in the
United States. Why can't clean energy
seem to exist without subsidies given
that electricity prices are going up and
we all agree that energy is
strategically important? Why can't it,
you know, fund itself?
>> Well, it it it has to, you know,
ultimately it has to be that. But, you
know, obviously there's a lot of debate
about what happened in this big
beautiful bill where they, you know,
basically are cutting back and then
eliminating the subsidies. And at least
this administration says, well wait,
these were put in 32 years ago for
infant indust industries and now the
prices come down. Why are we we doing
it? So I think these industries are
going to have to stand on their own
right now.
>> Would they be economical in their
current form?
>> I think you know it depends on the
circumstances and where they're built
and whether they have access to
transmission because of course you can
have solar but then you need you need it
connected to the grid and grid
connection becomes a very important
issue.
>> That's the expensive thing. That's why
with my solar panels on my farm, I mooch
off of the entire Connecticut system
grid.
>> How is your solar panels working?
>> They're fantastic. Our energy bills are
like maybe $20 a month. Sometimes we get
paid.
>> So, you put electricity back in the
system.
>> You didn't get any tax credits or
>> Well, the house had it when we bought
it.
>> Oh.
>> But I'm just very happy with the low
electricity bill and not having to
shoulder the costs of uh the grid.
>> Yeah. And somebody else will take care
of it. Somebody else's problem.
[Music]
I want to talk a little bit more about
the return of uh natural gas or LNG.
What do you think the prospects are for
the US as an LG export powerhouse? Can
it continue to grow at the pace that
it's been growing, especially given some
of the bottlenecks and constraints?
>> Yeah. Well, obviously you need pipes to
get gas to the Gulf Coast or to
Tidewater in order to ship the gas and
that ability to build pipes is really
difficult or has been difficult. It's
going to get easier now unless you're in
Texas where you could build them anyway.
But it's an amazing story. A decade ago,
the US was not exporting any LG. In
fact, and now it's the world's largest
exporter of LG. Yeah.
>> And our own numbers say that in the next
half decade or so, global capacity will
increase by over 50%. Half of that
increase will be in the United States.
You know, and people don't think about
it this way, but were it not for US LNG,
Putin might well have succeeded using
the energy weapon, cutting off gas to
Europe, and shattered the coalition
supporting Ukraine. And what prevented
him from doing that was US LNG, which he
hadn't counted on. I in in the book, you
mentioned the new map, I have this story
about where I had this interaction with
Putin in uh 2013, and it was at the St.
Petersburg International Economic Forum,
which was his version of Davos. Uh it
was before he enacted uh Crimea, and he
was up there on the platform with
Chancellor Merkel, and you could see the
ice between them. And they said to me,
"Oh, you get to ask the first question."
So I thought I was just asking the
question. Yeah, exactly. No pressure.
The normal question about um you know,
what are you going to do? Your budget is
overdependent on oil and gas. By
accident, I mentioned shale. And he
started shouting at me in front of all
these people and said, "Shale is
barbaric. It's terrible. He'll poison
people. He went on and on like that. And
I can tell you it was very unpleasant
being shouted at by Vladimir Putin in
front of 3,000 people.
>> But it's a good story.
>> Yeah. But it's a good story, you know.
Exactly. It did. At the time I didn't
think it was a good story. At the time I
wanted to get out of there. But uh
afterwards I thought he was actually
precient. He saw that uh shale gas in
the form of then LNG would augment US
influence in the world which it
certainly has and it would compete with
his jewel his crown jewel gas problem
which has also happened because now
Russian gas is being pushed out of of
Europe. So I think you know people don't
connect speak of connecting the dots
that the shell gas revolution there tied
into the ability to support Ukraine in
this war that's now gone on almost as
long as World War I.
>> It sounds like you're saying Aubry
McClendon is was a great hero for the
West and democracy and all this stuff.
>> Well, I'd say a great entrepreneur. Yes.
Yes.
>> Um when it comes to old school energy
sources, whether it's oil or gas.
>> I like your term old school. Is there
any lowhanging fruit left in terms of
making the technologies more efficient?
I remember maybe like almost 10 years
ago now there was a big standardization
push and all these you know drills that
used to have custom parts started to
standardize them and that actually
brought down prices quite a bit or
helped ease some of the pressure at a
time when oil prices were quite low. Is
there anything like that on the horizon?
>> Well, I think you're right. I mean shale
the development of the shale revolution
is to kind of continue your memory. It
really became a manufacturing process.
It was a very repetitive manufacturing
process and you know no one back then
when days of you mentioned Aubrey
Mlennon who's one of the pioneers could
have possibly envisioned the US being
the world's largest oil producer largest
natural gas producer. I think right now
you know about maybe 10% of the oil is
recovered from shale. So one thing
companies are working on can we increase
that output can we increase it be more
efficient but there is the sense uh now
which it wasn't even had a year ago that
maybe shale has peaked out
>> peaked out at a very high number but
peaked out and people I start to see are
starting to talk about what is known as
exploration going out and finding new
oil sources in parts of the world where
nobody really looked for them. Does it
make you nervous to use the word peak in
an oil conversation?
>> Now that you mention it, it does.
Uh what should I say? Plateau. How's
plateau? Okay, there you go.
>> Yeah, peak oil. I remember when when
people were talking about peak oil back
in, you know, decade and a half ago and
that the world was going to run out of
oil. I remember I said, I better go back
and look in the prize. I went back and
said, oh, the world has actually run out
of oil five times. And every time it's
what you pointed before, it's new
technologies and new geographies that
change the game.
>> Well, tell us a little bit more about
some of those times where so I guess
probably the 70s. When else has have
there been
>> well right at the end of peak oil
running out World War I turned out to be
a war that really sort of elevated oil
because it started with people on horses
and cavalry. It ended up with tanks and
airplanes and trucks and all of that.
And there was this great fear after
World War I that the US had what was it
uh nine years worth supply left. And so
what happened is American companies
started to go out and they went out to
the Middle East and of course found lots
of oil. So that was a period then after
World War II there was that concern
because oil had been so important. there
had been an oil war within the larger
war and then of course the 70s but it
had even happened in the in the 19th
century that you know people start
ringing the bell saying you know it's
it's all over and technology keeps
expanding the frontier
>> so speaking of oil supplies and
stockpiles one of the big stories in
energy markets has been China buying
enormous amounts of oil and stockpiling
them for reasons that we don't know for
certain how important has that dynamic
been to you know, a fairly resilient oil
price. Crude has come down a little bit,
but it's still, you know, around $60 a
barrel, I think.
>> And why are they doing it in your
opinion?
>> That is always the question. Why are the
Chinese stockpiling? I've been we've
been working on minerals, too, and
looking they stockpile minerals, too.
It's what they do. Is it because they
think there may be a a conflict or is
there a problem? Are they worried about
the South China Sea, which I write about
in the new map? and they know that
during World War II, the US cut off the
oil line to Japan and so they want to be
sure they have supplies. Or is it just
cuz it's cheap and they're expecting it
to go up? We don't know. I'll be there
in a couple months and I'll ask them
again. I'm not sure I'll get an answer,
but uh they're doing it. But the role of
China has changed because for two
decades, the growth in oil demand
worldwide, half of it was in China. And
now the view I won't use the word peak
I'll use the word plateau. Okay that
that uh demand in China is plateauing at
a high level but they're importing 75%
of their oil and they don't want to
continue to do that. That's why they've
been pushing one of the reasons they've
been pushing electric cars. The other
reason is because they see it as a way
to uh an export market. So you don't
have the growth engine of China. And so,
you know, there's a fair amount of
debate today at what rate at oil demand
will grow, but is it how how much will
it grow? Will it be a million barrels a
day, million half barrels a day? And
that is a subject within oil circles of
a great deal of vigorous debate. We
obviously don't know what uh Xihinping's
strategic plans are, mil potential
military plans in the future, but for
all of the EV adoption in China, which
has of course been huge,
military conflict, whatever the source,
is still be an incredibly oil inensive
process.
>> Yes, I think exactly. I mean, that's
right. All you're not going to have
battleships, you know, uh, you know,
solar powered not anytime soon. Yeah.
Yeah. I mean you do mention I mean what
is we know some things that are in
Xiinping's mind because he said them
>> and he does talk about the dominating
the new industrial supply chains which
means EVs which means solar panels which
means wind and of increasingly critical
importance batteries which is another
issue that's going to actually is
percolating up about here we have
regulations against uh batteries that
come from foreign entities of concern
and you say what's a foreign entity of
concern and it tends to be mean
parenthesis China in the energy
discussion.
>> Could you ever envision a time where
rare earths are more important
strategically than oil?
>> No. But I can tell you that they're
really important and I would say in the
last 6 months there has been if you're
here in Washington a crisis mentality
about them because I think that was a
shock when you know Trump was rolling
out all of his tariffs and the country
that they were going to be most aimed at
which was China. Suddenly China said
well you know two can play this game and
uh and then that is of course in recent
days has once once again come up the
Chinese whether for strategic reasons
but again new supply chains you know
they produce process 90% of the rare
earths and they know it and when you
hear an automobile maker saying you know
we have a week and a half of supply you
realize how urgent it is and so uh you
know it's really come up it's and trying
to grapple with and it's not something
you can solve overnight because it takes
a long time to open a mine, put up a
processing thing. And the Chinese have
put not only controls on rare earth,
they put controls on the machinery and
equipment for processing rare earth and
they put controls on the people who have
the knowhow that they may not be able to
have passports anymore.
>> Let's talk about US energy policy. It
seems a little unfocused to me. or we
might say variable.
>> Okay, go on. Like how would you
characterize it? Or like when you say
right, let's say it's variable. How
would you characterize what's going on
the way US energy security or energy
policy
>> and under Biden of course it was all
about basically renewables, climate
change, the goal that have no gas,
natural gas or coal and electric
generation by 2035. half the new cars in
America were to be electric by 2030.
That was then, this is now, when it's
just pretty much in the opposite
direction. Can the US, you know, I think
Trump would like
powerful, dominant US energy industry.
>> He uses that word.
>> Yeah. Is that realistic? Can he get
there? I mean, there's wanting to expand
drilling, but with the price of oil,
actually, it's below 50, below 60 now.
5875 today for like
>> can these things hang together? Can we
have prices at these levels and a
booming domestic oil industry? No, I
think that's one reason we get into not
the peaking but the plateauing uh for
that reason and you know you look at the
survey from the Dallas Federal Reserve
uh that came out and you know below 60
people don't um you know they just pull
back and they husband capital and you
know it certainly seemed that it was
possible that we would see oil prices
below 60 in the latter part of the year
and it's come maybe it's come earlier
than people might have expected and very
much affected by the trade war between
the US and China among other things but
the US is the dominant player right now
and uh energy you know the new trade
deal that you're supposed to have with
the US they're supposed to buy more
natural gas from us and so forth and
they have they set up something called
the national energy dominance council
which is you know kind of the view of
the US in this position but it is tough
to both want to have a very vibrant
domestic industry and have low prices at
the same time.
>> I know you just mentioned that Europe is
still going to be getting US oil, but do
you foresee a more I guess energy future
for the world because it does feel like
at least with manufacturing goods and
some strategically important goods,
people are stockpiling and people are
focused on building out their own
capacity. Is that going to be the case
in energy or will it be that energy is
just so geographically specific and
expertiseoriented that not everyone can
do?
>> Well, we've already seen a partitioning
of the global oil market in terms of
Russian oil not going to its natural
market, Europe but going to uh China
which was a market before and India
which was not a market before.
>> We see that in natural gas. So I think
call it economic nationalism or uh
economic sovereignty. I think that the U
and in a sense that's what all the
tariff policies are about. I think
Europe is in a very difficult position
because uh they would like to continue
to pursue net zero as it's called
emissions by 2050. But now they have
this other problem which is called being
competitive or rather not being
competitive and losing industry. And on
the other hand, they're now supposed to
spend not one and a half% but 5% of GDP
on uh defense. So I think Europe is in a
in a very tough position. M and I know
you speak to a lot of experts in the
energy industry, but what's your sense
of the mood on the ground among I guess
oil and gas workers specifically? Cuz on
the one hand, Trump has been a friend of
oil and gas and has said that he wants
oil and gas to be dominant. But on the
other hand, a lot of the policies that
he's actually put in place, you see
people in like the Dallas Fed survey
complaining about them and the mood
seems to be kind of bad.
>> Yeah. Well, I think it it's both. I
mean, I remember CEO of one oil company
saying he was actually to his surprise
was invited to I I don't know if he was
joking or not to the Biden White House,
but he said he had to go in through the
basement door. Uh and now, of course, uh
they're very, you know, accepted and,
you know, and part of the dialogue. You
know, I think it's a mixed message.
They're glad to see a reduction in all
these new regulations that have been
imposed and kind of just the general
hostility to an important US industry.
But on the other hand, they at low
prices, you you've seen, you know,
layoffs in the industry. You see people
putting down drilling rigs. You know, at
this prices, I think if they persist,
we'll see more of a negative impact.
[Music]
So the US is producing massive amounts
of oil and gas. How does this sort of
change the geography or the uh the
energy industry?
>> Well, it really has changed it uh
dramatically. It was really brought home
in 2019 when the Iranians attacked the
most important infrastructure in the
entire world, oil industry in Saudi
Arabia. and the price went up for a day
or two and then went down and I think
that's because of the existence of of
shale and just it kept growing and
growing and it gave a sense of security
that wasn't there before.
>> I totally forgot about that but I think
I was actually in the Middle East when
that happened.
>> Does OPEC matter anymore?
>> Uh yes and well it's really OPEC plus
that matters right now and they took a
lot of oil off the market basically
giving room market share to the US.
they're now begun the process of taking
back their market share and that's
partly what's reflected in price.
>> One of the things that is a constant
theme on the podcast and it comes up in
numerous industries whether we're
talking about housing or lumber or
anything else is that you know periods
of surplus or periods of slack you end
up paying for it at the end. You end up
maybe paying for it 5 10 years down the
road because you get this decline in
production. The talent leaves the
industry. The labor moves the industry.
the parts rust and you can't just like
take them out of the warehouse etc and
start drilling or whatever again. When
you look at the declining price of oil
today, are we going to pay for this at
some point?
>> I think so. Yeah. I think it's
interesting because I, you know, I had
to write this uh new epilogue for the
new edition 30th edition of the prize
and I was thinking about what are the
lessons and one of the lessons to me is
among the hundreds of characters in the
book, there are only two who really
matter. one is supply and one is demand
and they're always fluctuating between
the two of them and I could see that
today. Let me give you ana because
there's a natural decline that goes on
in oil which people are now saying and
gas maybe it's 5% a year. So in 2021 you
had the international energy agency come
out with a scenario for net zero by 2050
in terms of emissions. Uh and all these
steps to get there made it look rather
easy because demand was down and price
was down. They just came out with a new
study saying the world needs $540
billion dollars of investment every year
between now and 2050 just to kind of
stay where we are with oil. So it is
that cycle that people forget there's a
whole decline there. And I think if you
have a period of slack, you pay for it
down the road in terms of a tight market
because investment leaves. And I think
you made a really important point.
People leave too. They say, "I don't
want to be in this industry."
>> Yeah. We did some episodes a couple
years ago like actually when oil was
much higher about one of the constraints
would be well a bunch of like the
petroleum schools they didn't have the
same pipeline of engineering talent
because in 2019 or whatever those years
were who was going into majoring in
petroleum engineering in those years
>> exactly now it's actually looks like
it's a more attractive uh industry but
>> there's competition from geothermal as
well if you want to go drilling some
rock somewhere you now have options
>> well actually we didn't talk about
geothermal but in Fact there is now the
notion can you apply shale technology
trillion to
>> geother are you optimistic about that
>> um I don't go through optimism or
pessimism I just say but uh it's
promising let's see how it plays out
>> I want to talk more about Europe you
mentioned the industrial economy is
getting clobbered I mean German let's
just talk about just Germany maybe they
were able to substitute LG imported from
the US from some of its Russian sources
but the price is up and uh industrial
production in Germany has been terrible
Do you think at some point European
leaders will sort of cry uncle or cave
on the net zero ambition? Because it it
feels like the politics of that have
been running on fumes for years.
>> You know, it's interesting because of
course there so it's so entrenched that
it's hard for them. I mean, you could
say, okay, we're for net zero, but maybe
not by 2050. But Europe continues to,
you know, it's not just energy costs.
It's this incredible
weight and burden of regulations that
are designed without any connection to
the markets. I was talking to one
company on Sunday and they said they
just closed one facil plant in Europe.
They had another one that was 80% built
that they've decided not to go ahead
with. Talking to another company that's
also closing. I mean, they impose these
policies with no connection to the
marketplace or to technology, saying 70%
of jet fuel has to be so-called
sustainable aviation fuel. Well, it's
less than 1% now. And so, it's just if
you say it, it's going to happen. So, I
think maybe in Germany, we're starting
to see some of that easing up. But I I
think that those economic realities are
weighing down with them. And if they
don't step back and as I say it's not
just climate policies but it's this
whole regulatory straight jacket that
tells people go invest in the United
States.
>> I do feel like even before Russia
invaded Ukraine there was a sense that I
guess ESG in general was kind of
failing. You know inflation started to
pick up.
>> Zer bureau phenomenon.
>> Yeah. Well, inflation started to pick up
and suddenly there was what I thought
was an inevitable backlash against ESG
and targets net zero and things like
that. Do you think that ever comes back
or how would you characterize I guess
the the helpfulness of ESG when it comes
to building out clean energy?
>> Well, I think it was um clearly that all
was a package together. I think now
really the clean energy argument, the
argument for solar now is less about
that and it's about that you can do it
quickly and lay it down quickly and get
those electrons into the grid. So it's
more about less economics are kind of
working
>> economics rather than virtue and ESG
clearly is faded away. I can't see it
coming back with the full force that it
did because it has a built-in backlash
which we're seeing now. So I think it is
means that these things have to be more
market driven.
>> Does the boom in LNG exports from the US
raise prices for American households?
>> That is a of course a very critical
question and it was raised at the end of
the Biden administration. We did a study
on that. You know we've been S&P and the
commodity insight team there and
concluded that we have a lot of natural
gas so that it's not a threat in terms
of prices. Natural gas is not as
constrained as oil.
>> What about nuclear? We've gone this
entire conversation without talking
about nuclear, but nuclear, you know,
could solve all these problems.
>> Well, and it's also interesting because
that circles back to one of the points
we talked about before because you say,
well, what's brought nuclear back?
Partly it's you know just time partly
it's need but I think it's also the
entry of the tech companies from being
just consumers you know for software to
uh really worrying about data centers
and you look at it last time I looked
there was been $6 billion of venture
capital infusion nobody ever used to do
venture capital infusion that was what
the government did because it was 50
years away and we had a an event at our
SAR conference in Houston this year
where we had Commonwealth Fusion, which
came out of MIT, the head of the
largest, the main utility in Virginia,
and the governor of Virginia saying, you
know, we think we're going to have
fusion here by 2032. So, nuclear is
definitely back. Small modular reactors
are a hot topic. I think the first ones
will be deployed around 2030.
>> So, you think they're actually going to
happen because this seems like another
technology that's always 5 or 10 years
away. Well, I think it's going to
happen, but I think the test will be
then uh can you bring down the cost and
is it a more flexible way to add nuclear
but it is I think this it's really the
tech companies who I mean there you had
Amazon investing in one of the SMR
companies with the notion that they will
then buy successive reactors with the
idea that each one the cost will come
down. Now that will still be tested. It
still has to go through a regulatory
process at the nuclear regulatory
commission and all of that. But there's
certainly you have the sort of
entrepreneurial Silicon Valley spirit
now imbued into into nuclear which of
course is not an overnight thing but it
is back uh on the agenda and I think
history will go back and say in Germany
Chancellor Merkel's one of her two
biggest mistakes was shutting down the
nuclear basically in a weekend. What was
the other
>> that was and that was 25% of her
electricity. What was the other mistake?
>> The other m mistake was saying you know
immigration the door is open.
>> This might be a dumb question but you
know if
>> there's not such there's not such a
thing. I better watch out now. Okay.
>> But if Amazon or someone invests in a
small nuclear reactor or some other type
of energy plant, how are those
agreements actually structured in terms
of the offtake? cuz I assume they get
priority and then does whatever is left
over get sent into the grid.
>> Well, I guess it depends if it is a
reactor that's owned by a utility or is
it possible that these would be like
merchant nuclear reactors. You have seen
examples already where some of the I
guess we used to call them big tech now
we call them hyperscalers.
>> Uh when did that happen? We just all
started using that term. I don't even
anyway.
>> Yeah, exactly. I think it's about a year
I think. Yeah, just I mean for first
time you had to think what's a hypers
scale is it like an elephant what is
hyperscaling but um where they've signed
where they will take the entire offtake
of nuclear power plant so they are very
these companies are very concerned about
power because it's so electricity
intensive the other day there was a
story saying that the two data centers
that uh uh that Elon Musk is building in
Memphis will use more electricity than
all the households. So this is a big
issue for regulators. What do you going
back to the question you raised before
about who pays for this? How do these
costs get disagregated?
>> Right now you mentioned electricity
costs having gone up faster than
inflation. Right now can we draw a line
between these prices and the data center
boom or is this two things that happen
to be happening at once? I've seen
different views on how directly data
centers right now are contributing. I
think it I think it's it's part of it
and but it's just the general increase
of demand including you know EVs
although not on the scale that had been
envisioned. So all those things and just
having I mean we had gone for 25 years
with flat demand in electricity in the
United States then it and now it's just
recently that it started to grow again
and so you have a whole generation of
utilities who've grown up in flat demand
and now figuring how do you get things
built? How do you get through the
regulatory process and even when you get
it approved and you're end up in court
because somebody challenges it?
>> Are we ever going to solve the energy
problem?
>> No, I think it will just I mean it will
always be there as long as uh industrial
society it'll be one form or another.
Maybe
fusion the dream of
>> ah fusion. Yes. I used to play Sim City
and that was always the ultimate goal.
You you work up from the gas plant to
nuclear and then to fusion.
>> Fusion solves everything. But it's also
striking to me what I've noticed uh you
know having studied energy for you know
some time that you get a consensus about
energy and it lasts about three years
and then something new comes along and
just changes the view.
>> Are there any past periods? We actually
tal we talked a little bit about the
late 90s when there was the gas boom
then. Are there any other past periods
that people should study right now that
might help inform the current
environment? Well, I think that uh what
we have to remember which to me is
absolutely uh critical is energy
security and that it gets forgotten and
for me I have this story in the prize
about Winston Churchill converting the
Royal Navy from coal to oil before the
first world war which to me is that is
what made oil a strategic commodity that
that transition.
>> Why did he do that? He did it because
you gained speed, flexibility, you
didn't need to have all these guys
shoing coal on board and you gained 30%
extra cargo space.
>> That's the very start of the book,
right? That's the opening anecdote.
>> Exactly. And I always thought that
phrase. He said safety in oil, but we
could say in energy lies in variety and
variety alone. That you don't want to be
overdependent on anything. You want
variety whether in terms of your
suppliers, in terms of your sources.
>> We ever going to bring whale oil back?
You know, I said there's not a single
energy source that has not increased.
Even wood has increased. The only one
that hasn't increased is whale oil.
>> All right. Joe can dream, I guess. Dan
Jurgen, author of the probably, I'm
pretty sure the best book on the oil
market ever. Thank you so much for
coming on All Thoughts.
>> Thank you. It's great.
[Music]
Joe, that was so much fun. I'm so glad
we finally got together.
>> I can't believe it took us that long to
uh talk to Dan, but that was great.
>> I know. Well, fortuitous meeting in
Washington DC.
I got to say his point about the sort of
interconnection between energy and
technology.
>> Definitely, it does seem to be a driving
force, right? And as soon as you get new
advancements in weaponry or transport or
in this case software,
>> you do tend to get a a sudden like
rethinking of what your energy needs
actually are or some sort of transition.
>> And then on the flip side, like if you
ever are in an era of energy surplus,
you're going to find something to do
with it, right? Like you're never just
sit around and like here's a bunch of
cheap energy, let's not do anything with
Although China is stockpiling
successfully, right?
>> Well, they are stockpiling. We don't
know for what exactly, but yes, they
>> haven't spent it yet.
>> They haven't spent it yet. Although
they're spending, I guess, in a sense,
to acquire all the oil. It does feel to
me and I it's not like this is that new
but there was a phase in probably the US
and Europe in the late 2010s and maybe
it extended through 2020 magical
thinking with respect to energy being
solved regard you know that there is
just like this like clear path towards
cheap clean abundant energy and some
sort of reality clearly smacked a lot of
policy makers to the face and I guess
the question is how locked into current
plans are they what has to give? It does
feel like in Europe specifically the
constraints when it comes to industry,
energy, climate security are pretty
real.
>> It seems to me like the big problem is
the cyclicality of the industry. like
you're constantly going through booms
and busts and as soon as you get a boom
in oil production, it inevitably leads
to a collapse in oil prices and then you
struggle to build out capacity for years
and years and then there's not enough
oil and then prices start to rise and
everyone goes back in again.
>> If we could find some way to moderate
that, I don't know how you would do it,
but that might be a way forward. I feel
like an underrated element of the
Chinese economic story over the last
however many decades has just been this
like sustained boom without major
downturn etc. And so then you don't get
these like big periods of like people
leaving an industry or whatever that are
really hard to escape out of. It's like
I sort of think the cure for the boom
bus cycle is just perpetual boom. Like
that's the answer. Just always be
booming.
>> Always be booming.
>> I like that. But I also have to say
China as a source of energy demand, you
know, they're buying for stockpiles
right now, but they're using so many
electric vehicles that their gas
consumption is actually going down.
Gasoline,
>> it's very impressive.
>> All right. Uh, should we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Arman Dash
Bennett at Dashbot and Kaleb Brooks at
Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content, go
to bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes and you can chat about all
of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLotss, if you like
it when we talk about the future
landscape of the energy industry, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]